README.md, before:

# secondguess

Machine translation systems make many assumptions, missing a couple words that they could have translated - if only they were a little bit more lenient.

This is a soft dictionary lookup solution that can post-process machine translation output to translate some of the words that were not translated. This works by splitting OOVs (out-of-vocabulry words, unknown words) into multiple parts and then performing a fuzzy lookup in the dictionary for all these parts, yielding english compounds, scoring them according to some handcrafted features and outputs the best option, as shown in these pictures from explanatory slides:

![architecture views](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/sjmielke/secondguess/master/architecture.png)

Fun bonus: a glosser using this "guessing" architecture.

![glosser screenshot](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/sjmielke/secondguess/master/glosser.png)

## Installation

### Dependencies

- Python 3, must be executable/in path as `python3`
- [morfessor](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/Morfessor) 2.0, must be executable/in path as `morfessor`
- [SCOOP](https://github.com/soravux/scoop), e.g. `pip3 install --user scoop`
- the [AGILE tokenizer](https://github.com/isi-nlp/agile_tokenizer/) has to be cloned into `tools/agile_tokenizer`

### Data

Your "static data" directory must contain the following files with these exact names (you can specify `$LEX` yourself):

| description | filename |
| ----- | ----- |
| lexicon (3-col TSV: `source [ignored] target`) | `${LEX}` |
| training corpus, tokenized target side | `train.target.agile` |
| leidos-unigrams (i.e. output of `sort | uniq -c | sort -nr` ) | `leidos_unigrams` |
| Ulf's grammar (uig-specific, sorry) | `grammar.uig-v04.txt` |
| Ulf's pertainym list | `english.pertainyms.txt` |
| binary Morfessor model | `binary-baseline-model` |
| ELISA packages (used for ELISA package output) | `package/elisa.*-eng.${set}.y1r1.*.xml.gz` |

### Things that depend on the ISI HPC cluster:

- `bleu.pl` for BLEU calculation (will be safely skipped, if not on HPC)
- `packagesbmt.sh` (will be safely skipped, if not on HPC)
- `CALL_{SYSTEM,SET,SETPART}` are set to use `qsub -q isi` in `run.system.sh` (replace by e.g. `bash` if not on HPC, see `run.singlefile.sh`)

## Usage examples

### `run.system.sh`

`bash run.system.sh SBMTSYSTEMPATH SETS STATICDATAPATH LEXICONNAME REFERENCES`, e.g.:

```
/home/nlg-05/sjm_445/pyguess/run.system.sh \
	/home/nlg-02/pust/elisa-trial/isi-sbmt-v5-uzb \
	"dev test syscomb domain domain2 eval" \
	staticdata \
	guessing_input_lexicon.v14 \
	/home/nlg-02/pust/elisa-trial/il3-eng-eval-2016-07-06/data/
done
```
Run in the directory where you want to store all resulting data. The script will create a folder with the system name (`isi-sbmt-v5-uzb` in this case) and store all stuff there. All results including finished ELISA packages will be in the `data` subfolder.

### `run.singlefile.sh`

`bash run.singlefile.sh INFILE STATICDATAPATH LEXICONNAME`, e.g.:

```
/home/nlg-05/sjm_445/pyguess/run.system.sh \
	some.oovs.txt \
	/home/nlg-05/sjm_445/uyghur/on_top_of/__staticdata \
	guessing_input_lexicon.v14 \
done
```
Run anywhere. Will create `$INFILE.guessed.1best.hyp` and `$INFILE.guessed.nbest.json` (in the same folder as `$INFILE`).

Behind the scenes the script will make a "set" out of the file, create a folder in the `$TMPDIR` match the whole set and then continue guessing the set just like `run.system.sh`, so if you have expensive matching to do, consider wrapping the call in a `qsub`-script yourself.

## Architecture

`run.{singlefile,system}.sh` source `run.functions.sh`. This is where preprocessing, matching, guessing and postprocessing calls are defined. The python programs are controlled using a JSON config file `pyguess.config`. This file is generated by all the shell scripts on each invocation using the given parameters.

### Preprocessing

For each set individually:
- `tools/extract_tokens.py` extracts an OOV list from the SBMT output (obtained by running `nbest2json` in `run.system.sh`).
- All pipes (`|`) in that list are replaced with slashes to avoid clashes with morfessor-flatcat... which is not yet included, but better be prepared.
- Morfessor segments that input.
- `guess_phrases.py` generates a bunch of phrase parts.

### Matching

For all these phraseparts together:
- Pipe all phraseparts (types) into `guess_matching.py`, this generates one big `allmatches` dictionary

### Guessing

For each set individually:
- `thirdeye.py` calculates 1best and nbest translations for the OOV list using the (now shared) `allmatches` dictionary

### Postprocessing

For each set individually:
- `tools/rejoin_oovs.py` re-inserts the 1best translations of the OOVs into the SBMT output
- This file is detokenized, BLEU scores are calculated and it is packaged into a nice ELISA package.

## Notes and TODOs

- Many things are probably super inefficient.
- SCOOP and HPC don't exactly seem to like each other.
- Storing all matches in one big `allmatches` file per system is a giant race condition disaster waiting to happen. The `run.singlefile.sh` script circumvents that problem by not sharing anything and doing all calculations in a temporary directory.

Commit message:

Remove SCOOP for old spam-jobs-style parallelism.

README.md, after:

# secondguess

Machine translation systems make many assumptions, missing a couple words that they could have translated - if only they were a little bit more lenient.

This is a soft dictionary lookup solution that can post-process machine translation output to translate some of the words that were not translated. This works by splitting OOVs (out-of-vocabulary words, unknown words) into multiple parts and then performing a fuzzy lookup in the dictionary for all these parts, yielding english compounds, scoring them according to some handcrafted features and outputs the best option, as shown in these pictures from explanatory slides:

![architecture views](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/sjmielke/secondguess/master/architecture.png)

Fun bonus: a glosser using this "guessing" architecture.

![glosser screenshot](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/sjmielke/secondguess/master/glosser.png)

## Installation

### Dependencies

- Python 3, must be executable/in path as `python3`
- [morfessor](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/Morfessor) 2.0, must be executable/in path as `morfessor`
- the [AGILE tokenizer](https://github.com/isi-nlp/agile_tokenizer/) has to be cloned into `tools/agile_tokenizer`

### Data

Your "static data" directory must contain the following files with these exact names (you can specify `$LEX` yourself):

| description | filename |
| ----- | ----- |
| lexicon (3-col TSV: `source [ignored] target`) | `${LEX}` |
| training corpus, tokenized target side | `train.target.agile` |
| leidos-unigrams (i.e. output of `sort | uniq -c | sort -nr` ) | `leidos_unigrams` |
| Ulf's grammar (uig-specific, sorry) | `grammar.uig-v04.txt` |
| Ulf's pertainym list | `english.pertainyms.txt` |
| binary Morfessor model | `binary-baseline-model` |
| ELISA packages (used for ELISA package output) | `package/elisa.*-eng.${set}.y1r1.*.xml.gz` |

### Things that depend on the ISI HPC cluster:

- `bleu.pl` for BLEU calculation (will be safely skipped, if not on HPC)
- `packagesbmt.sh` (will be safely skipped, if not on HPC)
- `CALL_{SYSTEM,SET,SETPART}` are set to use `qsub -q isi` in `run.system.sh` (replace by e.g. `bash` if not on HPC, see `run.singlefile.sh`)

## Usage examples

### `run.system.sh`

`bash run.system.sh SBMTSYSTEMPATH SETS STATICDATAPATH LEXICONNAME REFERENCES`, e.g.:

```
/home/nlg-05/sjm_445/pyguess/run.system.sh \
	/home/nlg-02/pust/elisa-trial/isi-sbmt-v5-uzb \
	"dev test syscomb domain domain2 eval" \
	__staticdata \
	guessing_input_lexicon.v14 \
	/home/nlg-02/pust/elisa-trial/il3-eng-eval-2016-07-06/data/
```
Run in the directory where you want to store all resulting data. The script will create a folder with the system name (`isi-sbmt-v5-uzb` in this case) and store all stuff there. All results including finished ELISA packages will be in the `data` subfolder.

### `run.singlefile.sh`

`bash run.singlefile.sh INFILE STATICDATAPATH LEXICONNAME`, e.g.:

```
/home/nlg-05/sjm_445/pyguess/run.system.sh \
	some.oovs.txt \
	/home/nlg-05/sjm_445/uyghur/on_top_of/__staticdata \
	guessing_input_lexicon.v14
```
Run anywhere. Will create `$INFILE.guessed.1best.hyp` and `$INFILE.guessed.nbest.json` (in the same folder as `$INFILE`).

Behind the scenes the script will make a "set" out of the file, create a folder in the `$TMPDIR` match the whole set and then continue guessing the set just like `run.system.sh`, so if you have expensive matching to do, consider wrapping the call in a `qsub`-script yourself.

## Architecture

`run.{singlefile,system}.sh` source `run.functions.sh`. This is where preprocessing, matching, guessing and postprocessing calls are defined. The python programs are controlled using a JSON config file `pyguess.config`. This file is generated by all the shell scripts on each invocation using the given parameters.

### Preprocessing

For each set individually:
- `tools/extract_tokens.py` extracts an OOV list from the SBMT output (obtained by running `nbest2json` in `run.system.sh`).
- All pipes (`|`) in that list are replaced with slashes to avoid clashes with morfessor-flatcat... which is not yet included, but better be prepared.
- Morfessor segments that input.
- `guess_phrases.py` generates a bunch of phrase parts.

### Matching

For all these phraseparts together:
- Pipe all phraseparts (types) into `guess_matching.py`, this generates one big `allmatches` dictionary

### Guessing

For each set individually:
- `thirdeye.py` calculates 1best and nbest translations for the OOV list using the (now shared) `allmatches` dictionary

### Postprocessing

For each set individually:
- `tools/rejoin_oovs.py` re-inserts the 1best translations of the OOVs into the SBMT output
- This file is detokenized, BLEU scores are calculated and it is packaged into a nice ELISA package.

## Notes and TODOs

- Many things are probably super inefficient.
- My parallelism (create lots of scripts and jobs) works, but...
- Storing all matches in one big `allmatches` file per system is a giant race condition disaster waiting to happen. The `run.singlefile.sh` script circumvents that problem by not sharing anything and doing all calculations in a temporary directory.
